So there's one other thing we can do with loops,
and that's to include an else clause.
Experienced programmers often
avoid using else in this way, and that's
because less experienced programmers can
struggle to understand their code.
But it's something you might come across,
so I want to cover it here. We've seen else
when we looked at testing conditions
using if, but it can also be used at the
end of loops. It's possibly an
unfortunate word to use for what it does
with loops though, because it's use
doesn't imply "otherwise" in any sense.
What it does, is cause a block of code to
be executed if the loop was allowed to
continue to the end, in other words, if
the loop wasn't broken out of. With what
we've covered so far, any example we use
will either be contrived, or could be
written better some other way. I don't
like showing you code that could be
written better, so the first example will
be a bit contrived. So let's assume we've
noticed that lottery numbers divisible
by 8 are less likely to appear. Now I
know that's not realistic - I did say this
example was contrived. We want to write
some code that will check a list of
numbers, and let us know if the list
contains any values that are divisible
by 8. So let's start with a new file.
We'll call this one contrived.py, and we'll
start with a new list as well:
numbers is equal to left and right
square brackets 1 comma 45 comma 32
comma 12 and 60. Now we're going to look
at lists in the next section. All we need
to know here, is that they're enclosed in
square brackets and are a sequence type.
So we know that we can iterate over
sequences - we did that a lot with the
string type. Let's try out some code. So
I'm going to type for number in numbers:
if number percent, which is the
remainder operator, 8 is equal to 0 : and I'll
put a comment here - I'm going to put reject the list.
Then I'll print out the message, print
parentheses double quotes The numbers
are unacceptable, and we'll also break. So
here what we're doing, for each number in
the list, we're checking if it's exactly
divisible by 8, using a modulo or
remainder operator. If it is, we print a
message rejecting the list and break
out of the loop. Now these numbers should
be rejected because we've got the value
32 in the list. So we run the program and
the numbers are rejected, so that works.
But let's see what happens with the list
of numbers that aren't divisible by 8.
So I'm going to change the 32 to a 31. Run
the code again, and you see this time, we
don't get the message that they're
unacceptable, which we're expecting, having
changed 32 back to 31. So the code works
but it's not very friendly.
It hasn't given us any output. So what
would be a lot friendlier, is if we've
got a message saying that these numbers
were okay. So this is where Pythons else
can be useful, when used in a loop. When
our loop finds a value that's not
acceptable, our code breaks out of the
loop, as we saw the first time we ran the
program.
That means the loop will only terminate
normally if all the values are acceptable.
So what we want to do, is run
some code when the loop terminates
normally. We don't want that code to
execute if we break out of the loop, only
when it goes all the way around, and
that's exactly what else does. So let's
see that working. So I'm going to put an
else here on line 8, colon and print
parentheses double quotes All those
numbers are fine. So if I run the program,
this time we get the message, All those
numbers are fine. We didn't break out of the
loop, in other words, and the code in the
else block is executed. Then when I
change to this, to include an
unacceptable number, we'll change 12 to 16,
run that again. This time we get the
output, The numbers are unacceptable.
In other words, we've broken out of the
loop, and because the loop didn't
terminate normally, the code in the else
block - this is the code on line 9 - didn't
get executed. Now once again, take careful
notice of the indentation. This is
particularly tricky, here as an else can
follow both the if or the for statements.
It's only the indentation level that
ties the else to the for. Here, the else
on line 8, is at the same level as the for, on line 3.
That means else is associated with the
for loop and not with the if statement.
Alright so that was a contrived example
to show how else works when it's used
with a loop. You may want to step through
the code in the debugger, to see exactly
what's happening. If you do, remember to
change 16 back to 12 and debug the code
again, and that'll let you see the else
block executing, when the loop terminates
normally. Alright so moving on,
in the next video
we'll see a more realistic use of else.
See you in the next video.